.. _clixon_install:

Installation
============

.. This is a comment
   
Clixon runs on Linux, `FreeBSD port <https://www.freshports.org/devel/clixon>`_ and Mac/Apple. CPU architecures include x86_64, i686, ARM32.

You can also run Clixon in a docker container.

Ubuntu Linux
------------

Installing dependencies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Install packages::

  sudo apt-get install flex bison

There are two RESTCONF variants. Either a reverse proxy solution using fcgi and (for example) nginx::

  sudo apt-get install fcgi-dev nginx

For RESTCONF using the native http solution `libevhtp`_ needs to be built from source as well as::

  sudo apt-get install libevent-2.1

Install and build CLIgen::

  git clone https://github.com/clicon/cligen.git
  cd cligen;
  configure
  make;
  make install

Add a clicon user and group, using useradd and usermod::
   
  sudo useradd -M -U clicon
  sudo usermod -a -G clicon <youruser>
  sudo usermod -a -G clicon www-data

Build from source
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
::
   
     configure	       	       # or: configure --with-restconf=evhtp
     make                      # Compile
     sudo make install         # Install libs, binaries, config-files and include-files

FreeBSD
-------

FreeBSD has ports for both cligen and clixon available.
You can install them as binary packages, or you can build
them in a ports source tree locally.

If you install using binary packages or build from the
ports collection, the installation locations comply
with FreeBSD standards and you have some assurance
that the installed package is correct and functional.

The nginx setup for RESTCONF is altered - the system user
www is used, and the restconf daemon is placed in
/usr/local/sbin.

Binary package install
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
To install the pre-built binary package, use the FreeBSD pkg command:
::
   
  % pkg install clixon

This will install clixon and all the dependencies needed.

Build from source
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you prefer you can also build clixon from the
`FreeBSD ports collection <https://www.freebsd.org/doc/handbook/ports-using.html>`_

Once you have the Ports Collection installed, you build clixon like this
::

   % cd /usr/ports/devel/clixon
   % make && make install

One issue with using the Ports Collection is that it may
not install the latest version from GitHub. The port is
generally updated soon after an official release, but there
is still a lag between it and the master branch. The maintainer
for the port tries to assure that the master branch will
compile always, but no FreeBSD specific functional testing
is done.

Systemd
-------

Once installed, Clixon can be setup using systemd. The following shows an example with the backend and restconf daemons for the main example.
Install them as /etc/systemd/system/example.service and /etc/systemd/system/example_retsconf.service, for example.

Systemd backend
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The backend service is installed at /etc/systemd/system/example.service, for example. Note that in this example, the backend installation requires the restconf service, which is not necessary.
::

   [Unit]
   Description=Starts and stops a clixon example service on this system
   Wants=example_restconf.service
   [Service]
   Type=forking
   User=root
   RestartSec=60
   Restart=on-failure
   ExecStart=/usr/local/sbin/clixon_backend -s running -f /usr/local/etc/example.xml
   [Install]
   WantedBy=multi-user.target


Systemd restconf
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
The Restconf service is installed at /etc/systemd/system/example_restconf.service, for example::
   
   [Unit]
   Description=Starts and stops an example clixon restconf service on this system
   Wants=example.service
   After=example.service
   [Service]
   Type=simple
   User=www-data
   WorkingDirectory=/www-data
   Restart=on-failure
   ExecStart=/www-data/clixon_restconf -f /usr/local/etc/example.xml
   [Install]
   WantedBy=multi-user.target


Libevhtp
--------
For RESTCONF using native http build evhtp from source as follows::

  sudo git clone https://github.com/criticalstack/libevhtp.git
  cd libevhtp/build
  cmake -DEVHTP_DISABLE_REGEX=ON -DEVHTP_DISABLE_EVTHR=ON ..
  make
  sudo make install

Docker
------
Clixon can run in a docker container.  As an example the `docker` directory has code for building and running the clixon test suite::

  cd docker/main
  make docker
  make test

The docker tests are run in the [clixon travis CI](https://travis-ci.org/github/clicon/clixon).

Vagrant
-------

Clixon uses vagrant in testing. For example to start a freebsd vagrant host, install Clixon and run the test suite, do  ::

  cd test/vagrant
  ./vagrant.sh freebsd/FreeBSD-12.1-STABLE

Other platforms include: ubuntu/bionic64 and generic/centos8

Advanced install
----------------

The Clixon `configure` script (generated by autoconf) includes several options apart from the standard ones.

These include (standard options are omitted)
  --enable-debug          Build with debug symbols, default: no
  --disable-optyangs      Include optional yang files in clixon install used for example and testing, default: no
  --enable-publish        Enable publish of notification streams using SSE and curl
  --with-cligen=dir       Use CLIGEN here
  --without-restconf      No RESTCONF
  --with-restconf=fcgi    RESTCONF using fcgi/ reverse proxy. This is default.
  --with-restconf=evhtp   RESTCONF using native http with libevhtp
  --with-wwwuser=<user>   Set www user different from www-data
  --with-configfile=FILE  set default path to config file
  --with-libxml2          use gnome/libxml2 regex engine
  --with-yang-installdir=DIR  Install Clixon yang files here (default: ${prefix}/share/clixon)
  --with-opt-yang-installdir=DIR  Install optional yang files here (default: ${prefix}/share/clixon)
